Experiment 1

Aim: Familiarization with Arduino/Raspberry Pi and performing necessary software installation.
Arduino Installation Steps:

Step 1: Download Arduino IDE:
o Visit the official website: https://www.arduino.cc.
o Download the appropriate version for your operating system.
Step 2: Launch the Arduino IDE:
o Once the download is complete, unzip the folder if it's in a compressed format.
Step 3: Open the Application:
o Locate the application icon inside the extracted folder.
o Look for the icon labeled with the infinity symbol (application.exe for Windows).
o Double-click the icon to launch the Arduino IDE.
Step 4: Open an Existing Project Example
• Once the Arduino IDE software starts, you will have two options:
• Create a New Project
• Open an Existing Project Example
• To create a new project
• Select File → New from the top menu.
• To open an existing project example:
• Select File → Examples → Basics → Blink.
Here, we are selecting one of the examples named "Blink." This example turns the LED on and off with a
time delay.
You can select any other example from the list based on your preference.
Step 5: Select Your Arduino Board
To avoid any errors while uploading your program to the board, you must select the correct Arduino board
that matches the one connected to your computer.
• Go to Tools → Board and select your board.
• In this example, we selected the Arduino Uno board according to our tutorial, but you should select
the board that matches the one you're using.
Step 6: Select Your Serial Port
Select the serial device for your Arduino board.
• Go to Tools → Serial Port.
• This is likely to be COM3 or higher (COM1 and COM2 are usually reserved for hardware serial
ports).
• To find out which serial port corresponds to your board, you can disconnect the Arduino board,
reopen the menu, and see which entry disappears.
• Reconnect the board and select the correct serial port.
Before uploading your program to the board, it's important to familiarize yourself with the Arduino IDE
toolbar symbols
Step 7: Upload the Program to Your Board
• A: Used to check for any compilation errors.
• B: Used to upload a program to the Arduino board.
• C: Shortcut to create a new sketch.
• D: Used to directly open one of the example sketches.
• E: Used to save your sketch.
• F: Serial Monitor, used to receive serial data from the board and send data to the board.
Now, simply click the Upload button in the environment. Wait a few seconds, and you will see the RX
and TX LEDs on the board flashing. If the upload is successful, the message "Done uploading" will
appear in the status bar.

Raspberry Pi Installation
-------------------------
Required Items:
• Raspberry Pi (either Model B or Model B+)
• SD Card (recommended: 8GB class 4)
• Display and Connecting Cables
o Any HDMI/DVI monitor or TV will work.
o For best results, use one with HDMI input, but other connections are available for older
devices.
• Keyboard and Mouse (any standard USB keyboard and mouse will work)
• Power Supply (5V micro USB power supply)
• Internet Connection (optional, for updates or software downloads)
• Sound (headphones, earphones, or speakers with a 3.5mm jack)

Plugging in Your Raspberry Pi
1. Insert the SD card into the SD card slot on the Raspberry Pi (it will only fit one way).
2. Plug in your USB keyboard and mouse into the USB slots on the Raspberry Pi.
3. Ensure that your monitor or TV is turned on and the correct input (e.g., HDMI 1, DVI) is selected.
4. If you want to connect to the internet, plug an Ethernet cable into the Ethernet port next to the USB
ports. If no internet is needed, you can skip this step.
5. After confirming that all cables and the SD card are properly connected, plug in the micro USB
power supply to turn on and boot your Raspberry Pi.
6. If this is your first time using the Raspberry Pi SD card, you will need to select an operating system
and configure it.

Logging into Your Raspberry Pi
1. Once the Raspberry Pi finishes booting, a login prompt will appear.
o Default login:
Username: pi
Password: raspberry
o Note: When you type the password, no characters will appear for security reasons.
2. After logging in successfully, you will see the command line prompt:
pi@raspberrypi~$
3. To load the graphical user interface, type startx and press Enter.

Download and Install WiringPi
WiringPi is maintained under GIT for ease of tracking changes. If you’re unable to use GIT due to network
issues, there is an alternative installation method.

Online Install:
1. If you don't have GIT installed, you can install it with:
sudo apt-get install git-core
2. Make sure your Raspberry Pi is up-to-date:
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get upgrade
3. To obtain WiringPi using GIT:
git clone git://git.drogon.net/wiringPi
4. If you've already used the clone operation before, you can update it with:
cd wiringPi
git pull origin
5. To build and install WiringPi, use the simplified build script:
cd wiringPi
./build
The new build script will compile and install everything automatically. You may wish to inspect the script
before running it, as it uses sudo at one point.

Testing the Serial Port in Raspberry Pi
A great way to test the serial port is by using the minicom program. If you don't have it installed, you can
install it with:
• sudo apt-get install minicom
Connect your PC to the Raspberry Pi serial port using an appropriate serial adapter and wiring. Then, open
Putty or a similar serial terminal program on your PC side, setting the connection to 9600 baud.
Run minicom on the Raspberry Pi with the following command:
• minicom -b 9600 -o -D /dev/ttyAMA0
What you type into the minicom terminal on the Raspberry Pi should appear on the serial terminal of the PC,
and vice versa.


